 
 
 
 
 
Activity: 
Demonstrate the use of a Glucose meter 
1. Discuss the correct steps of using a Glucose meter 
2. Ask two participants to volunteer to demonstrate 
the use of a glucometer 
3. Discuss the process of calibration of the instrument 
Activity: 
Demonstration of foot examination 
• Discuss how to conduct the foot examination and 
calculate the risk assessment 
• Divide participants into pairs and ask them to carry 
out foot examination on each other and do the risk 
assessment 
• Summarize the activity by explaining the dos and 
don’ts for prevention of diabetes foot 
 Case study 1: A Newly Diagnosed Diabetic  
• A.B. 42 years female has with no past medical history and 
presents with 3 months of fatigue, excessive thirst and frequent 
urination at night . How will you manage initially? 
• A.B. is otherwise healthy with no other symptoms. She is a non- 
smoker who leads a sedentary lifestyle. What would you 
examine and test? 
• On examination, AB’s BMI is 32 but there are nil other 
remarkable findings. BP 130/75. FPG is 9.6mmol/L 
(172.8MG/DL), urine dipstick shows glucose 2+, the rest is 
negative. What further examinations and/or tests will you 
advise? 
• 
 Case study 2: Poorly controlled diabetic 
 
1. C.D. a 60 year- old male was diagnosed with T2DM 2 years 
ago. He is currently on metformin 2g daily and come to the 
PHC for a check-up after 12 months. What do you do? 
2. C.D. states that he has gained 4 kg over the past 6 months. 
He says that he has to wake up several times in the middle of 
the night to pass urine. He reports he is compliant with his 
metformin and has not experienced any side effects. He had 
a retinal exam and a urine protein test when he was 
diagnosed with diabetes. 
3. On examination, you note BMI 27, BP 130/75 but otherwise 
unremarkable. FPG 9.2mmol/L, Urine dipstick: 0 protein, 
glucose 1+, ketones 0 . What would you do next? 
  
Case study 3: Hypoglycemia 
 
1. I.J. is a 70 year- old male who was diagnosed with T2DM 8 years ago. He 
is currently on metformin 2g daily and gliclazide 80mg daily. He has come 
because he is sweating, has a headache and light-headedness. His last 
check-up was 6 months ago. What do you want to know? 
2. He reports he is otherwise well, is not in pain and has been compliant with 
his medication. He states that this is not the first episode. They occur about 
twice a week, most often a few hours after breakfast and are relieved by 
eating some crackers. He states he does have irregular meals as he 
sometimes forgets to eat. 
3. What is your provisional diagnosis? What do you want to do next? 
4. On examination, I.J. is frail, with BP 120/75. He is sweating, appears 
anxious and slightly disoriented and feels weak at the time of 
examination. Random plasma glucose 3.2mmol/L (57.6 mg/dl) 
5. What is your initial management? What is your follow up management? 
  
Case study 4 : Diabetic foot (1) 
 
1. 
G.H. is a 73 year- old male who was diagnosed with T2DM 1 year ago. He is on 
metformin 2g daily. He presents for the first time since his diagnosis with a 
deep ulcer on his right heel which he first noticed 1 day ago. What would you 
do next? 
2. 
He reports numbness in his feet but otherwise feels well. He has no history of 
ulcers. 
3. 
What is your provisional diagnosis? What would you do next? 
4. 
On examination BMI=26.0, BP 180/95 mmHg. Dorsalis pedis and posterior 
tibial pulses are present and strong on both feet. Monofilament test is positive 
for diabetic neuropathy. No other abnormalities apparent. The edges of the 
ulcer on the right heel are clean and there does not appear to be any slough 
and minimal surrounding erythema.. There is no evidence of gangrene, 
systemic infection or ulcers elsewhere. He has not been examined for diabetic 
eye disease when he was diagnosed. Investigations show FPG is 13.4mmol/L. 
Urine dipstick shows protein 0, ketones 2+. 
5. 
What would be your management? 
  
Case study 5-Newly diagnosed type 1 
 
• I.J. is a 26 year -old female who presents after experiencing 6 kg of weight 
loss over the past 3 months. She also reports feeling fatigued and lethargic. 
• What are your differential diagnosis? What would you do next? 
• I.J. reports that the weight loss has been unintentional. She has noticed 
that she has been eating roughly the same amount as usual. She has a 
family history of coeliac disease. IJ says she has been more thirsty than 
usual and has had to urinate more as a result, including at night. On 
examination, Liz appears to be a fatigued slender young adult. Vital signs 
are within normal limit. No lymphadenopathy present. Thyroid examination 
unremarkable. Tongue appears dry and coated. 
• What biochemical tests would you want to do next in the primary care 
setting? 
• Results are as follows: Blood film, haemoglobin and haematocrit are within 
normal limits. FBG 20.0mmol/L. Urine glucose +++, Ketones +++, HIV 
negative 
• What is your provisional diagnosis? How do you proceed? 
  
Case study 6- Diabetic Foot (2) 
 
• K.L. is a 60 year- old female who presents with a black 2nd toe on her left 
foot. She was diagnosed with T2DM 3 years ago and is currently on 
simvastatin 40mg daily, metformin 1g daily. She says she first noticed the 
black toe a couple of weeks ago, but has since come in because she has 
noticed that there is a deep ulcer at the tip of her 2nd toe. She currently 
smokes 20 cigarettes per day. She has not been reviewed since time of 
diagnosis. 
• What is your differential diagnosis? What do you want to know? What do 
you want to look for? 
• On examination, K.L.’s random PG is 20mmol/l. Her blood pressure is 
160/95. Examination shows that in her left foot, there is an absent dorsalis 
pedis pulse and a weak posterior tibial pulse. The tip of her 2nd toe in the 
left foot is black with a 1cm x 1cm x 1cm ulcer with clean edges. There is 
no surrounding erythema or swelling. Urinalysis shows protein 2+, ketones 
0. 
• How would you proceed? 
